.. _NEP55:

=========================================================
NEP 55 â€” Add a UTF-8 Variable-Width String DType to NumPy
=========================================================

:Author: Nathan Goldbaum <ngoldbaum@quansight.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2023-06-29


Abstract
--------

We propose adding a new string data type to NumPy where each item in the array
is an arbitrary length UTF-8 encoded string. This will enable performance,
memory usage, and usability improvements for NumPy users, including:

* Memory savings for workflows that currently use fixed-width strings and store
  primarily ASCII data or a mix of short and long strings in a single NumPy
  array.

* Downstream libraries and users will be able to move away from object arrays
  currently used as a substitute for variable-length string arrays, unlocking
  performance improvements by avoiding passes over the data outside of NumPy.

* A more intuitive user-facing API for working with arrays of Python strings,
  without a need to think about the in-memory array representation.

Motivation and Scope
--------------------

First, we will describe how the current state of support for string or
string-like data in NumPy arose. Next, we will summarize the last major previous
discussion about this topic. Finally, we will describe the scope of the proposed
changes to NumPy as well as changes that are explicitly out of scope of this
proposal.

History of String Support in Numpy
**********************************

Support in NumPy for textual data evolved organically in response to early user
needs and then changes in the Python ecosystem.

Support for strings was added to numpy to support users of the NumArray
``chararray`` type. Remnants of this are still visible in the NumPy API:
string-related functionality lives in ``np.char``, to support the obsolete
``np.char.chararray`` class, deprecated since NumPy 1.4 in favor of string
DTypes.

NumPy's ``bytes_`` DType was originally used to represent the Python 2 ``str``
type before Python 3 support was added to NumPy. The bytes DType makes the most
sense when it is used to represent Python 2 strings or other null-terminated
byte sequences. However, ignoring data after the first null character means the
``bytes_`` DType is only suitable for bytestreams that do not contain nulls, so
it is a poor match for generic bytestreams.

The ``unicode`` DType was added to support the Python 2 ``unicode`` type. It
stores data in 32-bit UCS-4 codepoints (e.g. a UTF-32 encoding), which makes for
a straightforward implementation, but is inefficient for storing text that can
be represented well using a one-byte ASCII or Latin-1 encoding. This was not a
problem in Python 2, where ASCII or mostly-ASCII text could use the Python 2
``str`` DType (the current ``bytes_`` DType).

With the arrival of Python 3 support in NumPy, the string DTypes were largely
left alone due to backward compatibility concerns, although the unicode DType
became the default DType for ``str`` data and the old ``string`` DType was
renamed the ``bytes_`` DType. This change left NumPy with the sub-optimal
situation of shipping a data type originally intended for null-terminated
bytestrings as the data type for *all* python ``bytes`` data, and a default
string type with an in-memory representation that consumes four times as much
memory as needed for ASCII or mostly-ASCII data.

Problems with Fixed-Width Strings
*********************************

Both existing string DTypes represent fixed-width sequences, allowing storage of
the string data in the array buffer. This avoids adding out-of-band storage to
NumPy, however, it makes for an awkward user interface. In particular, the
maximum string size must be inferred by NumPy or estimated by the user before
loading the data into a NumPy array or selecting an output DType for string
operations. In the worst case, this requires an expensive pass over the full
dataset to calculate the maximum length of an array element. It also wastes
memory when array elements have varying lengths. Pathological cases where an
array stores many short strings and a few very long strings are particularly bad
for wasting memory.

Downstream usage of string data in NumPy arrays has proven out the need for a
variable-width string data type. In practice, most downstream users employ
``object`` arrays for this purpose. In particular, Pandas has explicitly
deprecated support for NumPy fixed-width strings, coerces NumPy fixed-width
string arrays to ``object`` arrays, and in the future may switch to only
supporting string data via PyArrow, which has native support for UTF-8
encoded variable-width string arrays [1]_. This is unfortunate, since ``object``
arrays have no type guarantees, necessitating expensive sanitization passes and
operations using object arrays cannot release the GIL.

Previous Discussions
--------------------

The project last discussed this topic in depth in 2017, when Julian Taylor
proposed a fixed-width text data type parameterized by an encoding [2]_. This
started a wide-ranging discussion about pain points for working with string data
in NumPy and possible ways forward.

In the end, the discussion identified two use-cases that the current support for
strings does a poor job of handling:

* Loading or memory-mapping scientific datasets with unknown encoding,
* Working with string data in a manner that allows transparent conversion
  between NumPy arrays and Python strings, including support for missing
  strings.

As a result of this discussion, improving support for string data was added to
the NumPy project roadmap [3]_, with an explicit call-out to add a DType better
suited to memory-mapping bytes with any or no encoding, and a variable-width
string DType that supports missing data to replace usages of object string
arrays.

Proposed work
-------------

This NEP proposes adding ``StringDType``, a DType that stores variable-width
heap-allocated strings in Numpy arrays, to replace downstream usages of the
``object`` DType for string data. This work will heavily leverage recent
improvements in NumPy to improve support for user-defined DTypes, so we will
also necessarily be working on the data type internals in NumPy. In particular,
we propose to:

* Add a new variable-length string DType to NumPy, targeting NumPy 2.0.

* Work out issues related to adding a DType implemented using the experimental
  DType API to NumPy itself.

* Support for a user-provided missing data sentinel.

* A cleanup of ``np.char``, with the ufunc-like functions moved to a new
  namespace for functions and types related to string support.

* An update to the ``npy`` and ``npz`` file formats to allow storage of
  arbitrary-length sidecar data.

The following is out of scope for this work:

* Changing DType inference for string data.

* Adding a DType for memory-mapping text in unknown encodings or a DType that
  attempts to fix issues with the ``bytes_`` DType.

* Fully agreeing on the semantics of a missing data sentinels or adding a
  missing data sentinel to NumPy itself.

* Implement fast ufuncs or SIMD optimizations for string operations.

While we're explicitly ruling out implementing these items as part of this work,
adding a new string DType helps set up future work that does implement some of
these items.

If implemented this NEP will make it easier to add a new fixed-width text DType
in the future by moving string operations into a long-term supported
namespace. We are also proposing a memory layout that should be amenable to
writing fast ufuncs and SIMD optimization in some cases, increasing the payoff
for writing string operations as SIMD-optimized ufuncs in the future.

While we are not proposing adding a missing data sentinel to NumPy, we are
proposing adding support for an optional, user-provided missing data sentinel,
so this does move NumPy a little closer to officially supporting missing
data. We are attempting to avoid resolving the disagreement described in
:ref:`NEP 26<NEP26>` and this proposal does not require or preclude adding a
missing data sentinel or bitflag-based missing data support in the future.

Usage and Impact
----------------

The DType is intended as a drop-in replacement for object string arrays. This
means that we intend to support as many downstream usages of object string
arrays as possible, including all supported NumPy functionality. Pandas is the
obvious first user, and substantial work has already occurred to add support in
a fork of Pandas. ``scikit-learn`` also uses object string arrays and will be
able to migrate to a DType with guarantees that the arrays contains only
strings. Both h5py [4]_ and PyTables [5]_ will be able to add first-class
support for variable-width UTF-8 encoded string datasets in HDF5. String data
are heavily used in machine-learning workflows and downstream machine learning
libraries will be able to leverage this new DType.

Users who wish to load string data into NumPy and leverage NumPy features like
fancy advanced indexing will have a natural choice that offers substantial
memory savings over fixed-width unicode strings and better validation guarantees
and overall integration with NumPy than object string arrays. Moving to a
first-class string DType also removes the need to acquire the GIL during string
operations, unlocking future optimizations that are impossible with object
string arrays.

Performance
***********

Here we briefly describe preliminary performance measurements of the prototype
version of ``StringDType`` we have implemented outside of NumPy using the
experimental DType API. All benchmarks in this section were performed on a Dell
XPS 13 9380 running Ubuntu 22.04 and Python 3.11.3 compiled using pyenv. NumPy,
Pandas, and the ``StringDType`` prototype were all compiled with meson release
builds.

Currently, the ``StringDType`` prototype has comparable performance with object
arrays and fixed-width string arrays. One exception is array creation from
python strings, performance is somewhat slower than object arrays and comparable
to fixed-width unicode arrays::

  In [1]: from stringdtype import StringDType

  In [2]: import numpy as np

  In [3]: data = [str(i) * 10 for i in range(100_000)]

  In [4]: %timeit arr_object = np.array(data, dtype=object)
  3.55 ms Â± 51.3 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100 loops each)

  In [5]: %timeit arr_stringdtype = np.array(data, dtype=StringDType())
  12.9 ms Â± 277 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100 loops each)

  In [6]: %timeit arr_strdtype = np.array(data, dtype=str)
  11.7 ms Â± 150 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100 loops each)

In this example, object DTypes are substantially faster because the objects in
the ``data`` list can be directly interned in the array, while ``StrDType`` and
``StringDType`` need to copy the string data and ``StringDType`` needs to
convert the data to UTF-8 and perform additional heap allocations outside the
array buffer. In the future, if Python moves to a UTF-8 internal representation
for strings, the string loading performance of ``StringDType`` should improve.

String operations have similar performance::

  In [7]: %timeit np.array([s.capitalize() for s in data], dtype=object)
  30.2 ms Â± 109 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10 loops each)

  In [8]: %timeit np.char.capitalize(arr_stringdtype)
  38.5 ms Â± 3.01 ms per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10 loops each)

  In [9]: %timeit np.char.capitalize(arr_strdtype)
  46.4 ms Â± 1.32 ms per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10 loops each)

The poor performance here is a reflection of the slow iterator-based
implementation of operations in ``np.char``. If we were to rewrite these
operations as ufuncs, we could unlock substantial performance
improvements. Using the example of the ``add`` ufunc, which we have implemented
for the ``StringDType`` prototype::

  In [10]: %timeit arr_object + arr_object
  10 ms Â± 308 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100 loops each)

  In [11]: %timeit arr_stringdtype + arr_stringdtype
  5.91 ms Â± 18.8 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100 loops each)

  In [12]: %timeit np.char.add(arr_strdtype, arr_strdtype)
  65.9 ms Â± 1.3 ms per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10 loops each)

As described below, we have already updated a fork of Pandas to use a prototype
version of ``StringDType``. This demonstrates the performance improvements
available when data are already loaded into a NumPy array and are passed to a
third-party library. Currently Pandas attempts to coerce all ``str`` data to
``object`` DType by default, and has to check and sanitize existing ``object``
arrays that are passed in. This requires a copy or pass over the data made
unnecessary by first-class support for variable-width strings in both NumPy and
Pandas::

  In [13]: import pandas as pd

  In [14]: %timeit pd.Series(arr_stringdtype)
  20.9 Âµs Â± 341 ns per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10,000 loops each)

  In [15]: %timeit pd.Series(arr_object)
  1.08 ms Â± 23.4 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 1,000 loops each)

We have also implemented a Pandas extension DType that uses ``StringDType``
under the hood, which is also substantially faster for creating Pandas data
structures than the existing Pandas string DType that uses ``object`` arrays::

  In [16]: %timeit pd.Series(arr_stringdtype, dtype='string[numpy]')
  54.7 Âµs Â± 1.38 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10,000 loops each)

  In [17]: %timeit pd.Series(arr_object, dtype='string[python]')
  1.39 ms Â± 1.16 Âµs per loop (mean Â± std. dev. of 7 runs, 1,000 loops each)

Backward compatibility
----------------------

We are not proposing a change to DType inference for python strings and do not
expect to see any impacts on existing usages of NumPy, besides warnings or
errors related to new deprecations or expiring deprecations in ``np.char``.

Detailed description
--------------------

Here we provide a detailed description of the version of ``StringDType`` we
would like to include in NumPy. This is mostly identical to the prototype, but
has a few differences that are impossible to implement in a DType that lives
outside of NumPy.

First, we describe the Python API for instantiating ``StringDType`` instances.
Second, we describe the in-memory representation, heap allocation strategy, and
thread safety concerns. This is followed by a description of the missing data
handling support and support for strict string type checking for array
elements. We next discuss the cast and ufunc implementations we will define and
discuss our plan for the string manipulation functions in ``np.char``. Finally
we describe out plan to update the ``npy`` and ``npz`` file formats to support
writing sidecar data.

Python API for ``StringDType``
******************************

The new DType will be accessible via the ``np.dtypes`` namespace:

  >>> from numpy.dtypes import StringDType
  >>> dt = StringDType()
  >>> dt
  numpy.dtypes.StringDType()

In addition, we propose reserving the character ``"T"`` (short for text) for
usage with ``np.dtype``, so the above would be identical to:

  >>> np.dtype("T")
  numpy.dtypes.StringDType()

In principle we do not need to reserve a character code and there is a desire to
move away from character codes. However, a substantial amount of downstream code
relies on checking DType character codes to discriminate between builtin NumPy
DTypes, and we think it would harm adoption to require users to refactor their
DType-handling code if they want to use ``StringDType``.

``StringDType`` can be used out of the box to represent strings of arbitrary
length in a NumPy array:

  >>> data = ["this is a very long string", "short string"]
  >>> arr = np.array(data, dtype=StringDType())
  >>> arr
  array(['this is a very long string', 'short string'], dtype=StringDType())

Note that unlike fixed-width strings, ``StringDType`` is not parameterized by
the maximum length of an array element, arbitrarily long strings can live in the
array.

The ``StringDType`` class will be a synonym for the default ``StringDType``
instance when the class is passed as a ``dtype`` argument in the NumPy Python
API. We have already converted most of the API surface to work like this, but
there are still a few spots that have not yet been converted and it's likely
third-party code has not been converted, so we will not emphasize this in the
docs. Emphasizing that ``StringDType`` is a class and ``StringDType()`` is an
instance is a more forward-looking API that the rest of the NumPy DType API can
move towards now that DType classes are importable from the ``np.dtypes``
namespace, so we will include an explicit instantiation of a ``StringDType``
object in the documentation even if it is not strictly necessary.

We propose associating the python ``str`` builtin as the DType's scalar type:

  >>> StringDType.type
  <class 'str'>

While this does create an API wart in that the mapping from builtin DType
classes to scalars in NumPy will no longer be one-to-one (the ``unicode``
DType's scalar type is ``str``), this avoids needing to define and optimize a
``str`` subclass for this purpose or other hacks to maintain this one-to-one
mapping. To maintain backward compatibility, the DType detected for a list of
python strings will remain a fixed-width unicode string.

As described below, ``StringDType`` supports two parameters that can adjust the
runtime behavior of the DType. We will not attempt to support parameters for the
dtype via a character code. If users need an instance of the DType that does not
use the default parameters, they will need to instantiate an instance of the
DType using the DType class.

We will also extend the ``NPY_TYPES`` enum in the C API with an ``NPY_VSTRING``
entry (there is already an ``NPY_STRING`` entry). This should not interfere with
legacy user-defined DTypes since the integer type numbers for these data types
begin at 256, so in principle there is still room for hundreds more builtin
DTypes in the integer range available in the ``NPY_TYPES`` enum.

.. _memory:

Memory layout and Managing Heap Allocations
*******************************************

Since NumPy has no first-class support for ragged arrays, there is no way for a
variable-length string data type to store data in the array storage
buffer. Moreover, the assumption that each element of a NumPy array is a
constant number of bytes wide in the array buffer is deeply ingrained in NumPy
and libraries in the wider PyData ecosystem. It would be a substantial amount
of work to add support for ragged arrays in NumPy and downstream libraries, far
beyond the scope of adding support for variable-length strings.

Instead, we propose relaxing the requirement that all array data are stored in
the array buffer or inside of python objects. This DType would extend the
existing concept of an array of references in NumPy beyond the ``object`` DType
to include arrays that store data in sidecar heap-allocated buffers and use the
array to store metadata for the heap allocation.

Each array element would contain the contents of a C struct with the following
layout:

.. code-block:: C

   struct npy_static_string {
    size_t len;
    char *buf;
   };

Where ``len`` is the length, in bytes, of the string and ``buf`` is a pointer to
the beginning of a UTF-8 encoded bytestream containing the string data. We do
not append a trailing null character to the byte stream, so users attempting to
pass the ``buf`` field to an API expecting a C string must must create a copy
with a trailing null. This choice also means that unlike the fixed-width strings
in NumPy, ``StringDType`` array entries can contain arbitrary embedded or
trailing null characters.

We propose storing the string data for this data type in an external
heap-allocated arena buffer whose bookkeeping is managed by the ``StringDType``
instance associated with the array. Using a per-array arena allocator ensures
that the string buffers for nearby array elements are usually nearby on the
heap. We do not guarantee that neighboring array elements are contiguous on the
heap to support missing data and allow mutation of array entries, see below for
more discussion on how these topics affect the memory layout.

In addition to making a typedef for ``npy_static_string`` public, we also plan
to add an interface for allocating, copying, and freeing strings with this
layout via the arena allocator to the public numpy C API to ease downstream
integration.

In the future we may decide to exploit the small string optimization [6]_ to
encode strings smaller than the size of the ``npy_static_string`` struct
directly in the array buffer, bypassing the need for a heap allocation for that
entry. If this is implemented, we will reserve the most significant byte in the
``len`` for flags, including a flag to indicate the array element is stored in
the array buffer. For arrays consisting entirely of small strings this will
bypass the need to do any sidecar heap allocations. This should be relatively
straightforward to add but has not been completed yet to focus on other aspects
of the proposal. While reserving a whole byte for flags may be unnecessary, we
will still have 7 bytes of space in the ``len`` field, which is much more than
is likely to be necessary to store the length of a single array element in
real-world use, and having 256 possibilities for flags gives us flexibility for
the future.

Besides the string data itself, each array element requires 16 bytes of storage
for the ``npy_static_string`` instance in the array buffer. In principle we
could use a 32 bit integer to store the ``len`` field, saving 4 bytes per array
element, but if we only use a single bit for the small string optimization
that will still leave us with an uncomfortably small 31 bits of space in the
``len`` field. In addition, making use of the small string optimization will
somewhat offset the memory cost of a 64 bit ``len`` field, since many real-world
use-cases employ small strings.

Missing Data
++++++++++++

By default, zeroed out entries in the array buffer represent empty
strings. However, if the DType instance was created with an ``na_object`` field,
zeroed-out entries represent missing data. By making this choice, a zero-filled
newly allocated buffer returned by ``calloc`` does not need any additional
post-processing to produce an empty array. This choice also means casts between
different missing data representations are views.

Whether or not the ``na_object`` is set, empty strings are not stored in the
sidecar buffer since they require no additional storage besides the entry in the
array buffer itself. This means that adjacent entries in the sidecar buffer are
not necessarily adjacent entries in the array buffer.

Mutation and Thread Safety
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If we mandate that the string storage must be contiguous with no
over-allocation, enlarging a single array element requires re-allocating the
entire string storage buffer. This is a pathological performance degradation
compared with object string arrays. In addition to performance concerns,
mutation introduces the possibility of data races and use-after-free errors when
an array is accessed and mutated by multiple threads.

One solution would be to disable mutation, but inevitably there will be
downstream uses of object string arrays that mutate array elements that we would
like to support. Instead, we plan on implementing two modes for the arena
allocator: one for newly created arrays with contiguous storage, and one for
arrays that have been mutated.

Newly created arrays will be stored with a flag indicating they have contiguous
storage. The allocator will allow lock-free read access in this case, but writes
will be guarded by a lock that will be released once all reading threads have
completed reads. In cases when an array element is mutated into a smaller
string, the storage remains contiguous and there is no need for a new heap
allocation, so the storage will continue to be marked as contiguous. If an
element is enlarged, the contiguous storage flag is first set to false and the
array element will be re-allocated using a single heap allocation, with the
original content of the array element and the rest of the contents of the array
left alone in the sidecar buffer.

Thereafter, accesses to array elements will first have to check if the address
of the string data is inside the main sidecar storage buffer, and if not, access
for the element will be guarded by a fine-grained lock for both reads and writes
to avoid use-after-free errors or data races across thread boundaries. In
pathological cases where an array is allocated and then every array element is
individually enlarged, this will lead to bad performance and over-allocation of
memory. We will attempt to describe these performance concerns in public-facing
documentation for the DType and suggest copying to a newly allocated array after
mutating many array elements to avoid subsequent performance problems.

We plan to hide this complexity in the allocator implementation. When writing
ufuncs or casts using this DType, it will be necessary to mediate accesses to
array data via the allocator interface, but exactly how the data are stored will
be opaque to C API users, who will only see pointers to ``npy_static_string``
data in the array buffer.

Cython Support and the Buffer Protocol
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

It's impossible for ``StringDType`` to support the Python buffer protocol, so
Cython will not support idiomatic typed memoryview syntax for ``StringDType``
arrays unless special support is added in Cython in the future. We have some
preliminary ideas for ways to either update the buffer protocol [7]_ or make use
of the Arrow C data interface [8]_ to expose NumPy arrays for DTypes that don't
make sense in the buffer protocol, but those efforts will likely not come to
fruition in time for NumPy 2.0. This means adapting legacy Cython code that uses
arrays of fixed-width strings to work with ``StringDType`` will be
non-trivial. Adapting code that worked with object string arrays should be
straightforward since object arrays aren't supported by the buffer protocol
either and will likely have no types or have ``object`` type in Cython.

Missing data support
********************

Missing data can be represented using a sentinel:

  >>> dt = StringDType(na_object=np.nan)
  >>> arr = np.array(["hello", nan, "world"], dtype=dt)
  >>> arr
  array(['hello', nan, 'world'], dtype=StringDType(na_object=nan))
  >>> arr[1]
  nan
  >>> np.isnan(arr[1])
  True
  >>> np.isnan(arr)
  array([False,  True, False])
  >>> np.empty(3, dtype=dt)
  array([nan, nan, nan])

We only propose supporting user-provided sentinels. By default, empty arrays
will be populated with empty strings:

  >>> np.empty(3, dtype=StringDType())
  array(['', '', ''], dtype=StringDType())

By only supporting user-provided missing data sentinels, we avoid resolving
exactly how NumPy itself should support missing data and the correct semantics
of the missing data object, leaving that up to users to decide. However, we *do*
detect whether the user is providing a NaN-like missing data value, a string
missing data value, or neither. We explain how we handle these cases below.

A cautious reader may be worried about the complexity of needing to handle three
different categories of missing data sentinel. The complexity here is reflective
of the flexibility of object arrays and the downstream usage patterns we've
found. Some users want comparisons with the sentinel to error, so they use
``None``. Others want comparisons to succeed and have some kind of meaningful
ordering, so they use some arbitrary, hopefully unique string. Other users want
to use something that acts like NaN in comparisons and arithmetic or is
literally NaN so that NumPy operations that specifically look for exactly NaN
work and there isn't a need to rewrite missing data handling outside of
NumPy. We believe it is possible to support all this, but it requires a bit of
hopefully manageable complexity.

NaN-like Sentinels
++++++++++++++++++

A NaN-like sentinel returns itself as the result of comparison operations. This
includes the python ``nan`` float and the Pandas missing data sentinel
``pd.NA``. We choose to make NaN-like sentinels inherit these behaviors in
operations, so the result of addition is the sentinel:

  >>> dt = StringDType(na_object=np.nan)
  >>> arr = np.array(["hello", np.nan, "world"], dtype=dt)
  >>> arr + arr
  array(['hellohello', nan, 'worldworld'], dtype=StringDType(na_object=nan))

And a NaN-like sentinel will be sorted to the end of the array:

  >>> np.sort(arr)
  array(['hello', 'world', nan], dtype=StringDType(na_object=nan))

String Sentinels
++++++++++++++++

A string missing data value is an instance of ``str`` or subtype of ``str`` and
will be used as the default value for empty arrays:

  >>> arr = np.empty(3, dtype=StringDType(na_object='missing'))
  >>> arr
  array(['missing', 'missing', 'missing'])

If such an array is passed to a string operation or a cast, "missing" entries
will be treated as if they have a value given by the string sentinel:

  >>> np.char.upper(arr)
  array(['MISSING', 'MISSING', 'MISSING'])

Comparison operations will similarly use the sentinel value directly for missing
entries. This is the primary usage of this pattern we've found in downstream
code, where a missing data sentinel like ``"__nan__"`` is passed to a low-level
sorting or partitioning algorithm.

Other Sentinels
+++++++++++++++

Any other python object will raise errors in operations or comparisons, just as
``None`` does as a missing data sentinel for object arrays currently:

  >>> dt = StringDType(na_object=None)
  >>> np.sort(np.array(["hello", None, "world"], dtype=dt))
  ValueError: Cannot compare null that is not a string or NaN-like value

Since comparisons need to raise an error, and the NumPy comparison API has no
way to signal value-based errors during a sort without holding the GIL, sorting
arrays that use arbitrary missing data sentinels will hold the GIL. We may also
attempt to relax this restriction by refactoring NumPy's comparison and sorting
implementation to allow value-based error propagation during a sort operation.

Implications for DType Inference
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If, in the future, we decide to break backward compatibility to make
``StringDType`` the default DType for ``str`` data, the support for arbitrary
objects as missing data sentinels may seem to pose a problem for implementing
DType inference. However, given that initial support for this DType will require
using the DType directly and will not be able to rely on NumPy to infer the
DType, we do not think this will be a major problem for downstream users of the
missing data feature. To use ``StringDType``, they will need to update
their code to explicitly specify a DType when an array is created, so if NumPy
changes DType inference in the future, their code will not change behavior and
there will never be a need for missing data sentinels to participate in DType
inference.

Coercing non-strings
********************

By default, non-string data are coerced to strings:

  >>> np.array([1, object(), 3.4], dtype=StringDType())
  array(['1', '<object object at 0x7faa2497dde0>', '3.4'], dtype=StringDType())

If this behavior is not desired, an instance of the DType can be created that
disables string coercion:

  >>> np.array([1, object(), 3.4], dtype=StringDType(coerce=False))
  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
  ValueError: StringDType only allows string data when string coercion
  is disabled

This allows strict data validation in the same pass over the data NumPy uses to
create the array without a need for downstream libraries to implement their own
string validation in a separate, expensive, pass over the input array-like. We
have chosen not to make this the default behavior to follow NumPy fixed-width
strings, which coerce non-strings.

Casts, ufunc support, and string manipulation functions
*******************************************************

A full set of round-trip casts to the builtin NumPy DTypes will be available. In
addition, we will add implementations for the comparison operators as well as
an ``add`` loop that accepts two string arrays, ``multiply`` loops that
accept string and integer arrays, and an ``isnan`` loop. The ``isnan`` ufunc
will return ``True`` for entries that are NaN-like sentinels and ``False``
otherwise. Comparisons will sort data in order of unicode code point, as is
currently implemented for the fixed-width unicode DType. In the future NumPy or
a downstream library may add locale-aware sorting, case folding, and
normalization for NumPy unicode strings arrays, but we are not proposing adding
these features at this time.

Two ``StringDType`` instances are considered identical if they are created with
the same ``na_object`` and ``coerce`` parameter. We propose checking for unequal
``StringDType`` instances in the ``resolve_descriptors`` function of binary
ufuncs that take two string arrays and raising an error if an operation is
performed with unequal ``StringDType`` instances.

``np.strings`` namespace
************************

String operations will be available in a ``np.strings`` namespace that will
initially be populated with the ufunc-like functions in ``np.char``:

  >>> np.strings.upper((np.array(["hello", "world"], dtype=StringDType())
  array(['HELLO', 'WORLD'], dtype=StringDType())

In addition to outright removing the more obscure or deprecated functionality in
``np.char`` as part of the NumPy 2.0 API cleanup, we will deprecate and
eventually remove the existing string manipulation functions in ``np.char`` in
favor of ``np.strings``.

We feel ``np.strings`` is a more intuitive name and that NumPy 2.0 is as good a
time as any to fully eject the legacy baggage of ``chararray``.

This proposal is less for the sake of adding functionality and more
window-dressing than the other proposals in this NEP. If there isn't an appetite
for renaming the namespace, we could clean up ``np.char`` as planned for NumPy
2.0 and leave the ufunc-like functions in-place.

Serialization
*************

Since string data are stored outside the array buffer, serialization requires an
update to the ``npy`` file format, which currently can only include fixed-width
data in the array buffer. We propose defining format version 4.0, which adds an
additional optional ``sidecar_size`` header key that corresponds to the size, in
bytes, of an optional sidecar field that is written to disk following the array
data. If no sidecar storage is required, the writer will default to the current,
more widely compatible, file format and will not write a ``sidecar_size`` field
to the header. This also enables storage of arbitrary user-defined data types
once API hooks are added that allow a DType to serialize to the sidecar data and
deserialize from the loaded sidecar data.

This is an improvement over the current situation with object string arrays,
which can only be saved to an ``npy`` file using the ``allow_pickle=True``
option. Serializing arbitrary python objects requires the use of ``pickle``, so
there is no safe way to share untrusted ``npy`` files containing object string
arrays. This means users of object string arrays adopting ``StringDType`` will
also gain an officially supported way to safely share string data or load
variable-width string data from an untrusted source.

For cases where pickle support is required, support for pickling and unpickling
string arrays will also be implemented.

Related Work
------------

The main comparable prior art in the Python ecosystem is PyArrow arrays, which
support variable length strings via Apache Arrow's variable sized binary layout
[9]_. In this approach, the array buffer contains integer offsets that index
into a sidecar storage buffer. This allows a string array to be created using
only two heap allocations, leaves adjacent strings in the array contiguous in
memory, provides good cache locality, and enables straightforward SIMD
optimization. Mutation of string array elements isn't allowed and PyArrow only
supports 1D arrays, so the design space is somewhat different from NumPy.

Julia stores strings as UTF-8 encoded byte buffers. There is no special
optimization for string arrays in Julia, and string arrays are represented as
arrays of pointers in memory in the same way as any other array of sequences or
containers in Julia.

The tensorflow library supports variable-width UTF-8 encoded strings,
implemented with ``RaggedTensor``. This makes use of first-class support for
ragged arrays in tensorflow.


Implementation
--------------

A prototype version of ``StringDType`` using the experimental DType API is
available in the ``numpy-user-dtypes`` repository [10]_. Currently, most of the
functionality proposed above for the version of the DType we would like to add
to NumPy is already functioning. The major missing piece is the :ref:`arena
allocator <memory>` described above; currently memory is allocated using
``malloc`` and ``free``. We have an implementation plan for adding the arena
allocator [11]_.

We are focusing on implementation so there is no documentation yet, but the
tests illustrate what has been implemented [12]_. Note that if you are
interested in testing out the prototype, you will need to set the
``NUMPY_EXPERIMENTAL_DTYPE_API`` environment variable at runtime to enable the
experimental DType API in NumPy.

We have created a development branch of Pandas that supports creating Pandas
data structures using ``StringDType`` [13]_. This illustrates the refactoring
necessary to support ``StringDType`` in downstream libraries that make
substantial use of object string arrays.

While the NEP is being discussed, we plan on finishing the arena allocator
implementation and refactoring the prototype to minimize heap allocations and
keep string data contiguous in memory as much as possible.

If accepted, the bulk of the remaining work of this NEP is in preparing NumPy
for the DType, the work of adding the DType to NumPy itself, writing
documentation for the new DType, and updating the existing NumPy documentation
where appropriate. The steps will be as follows:

* Create an ``np.strings`` namespace, move the ufunc-like functions in
  ``np.char`` there, and deprecate ``np.char``.

* Formalize the update to the ``npy`` and ``npz`` serialization formats. We
  will add a hook to the DType API so that user DTypes can make use of the new
  sidecar storage capabilities and add support in ``StringDType`` while it is
  still outside the NumPy source tree.

* Move the ``StringDType`` implementation from an external extension module
  into NumPy, refactoring NumPy where appropriate. This new DType will be
  added in one large pull request including documentation updates. Where
  possible, we will extract fixes and refactorings unrelated to
  ``StringDType`` into smaller pull requests before issuing the main pull
  request.

* Deal with remaining issues in NumPy related to new DTypes. In particular,
  we are already aware that remaining usages of ``copyswap`` in ``NumPy``
  should be migrated to use a cast or an as-yet-to-be-added single-element
  copy DType API slot. We also need to ensure that DType classes can be used
  interchangeably with DType instances in the Python API everywhere it makes
  sense to do so and add useful errors in all other places DType instances
  can be passed in but DType classes don't make sense to use.

The third step depends on the first two steps, but the first two steps can be
done in parallel. The fourth step can also be done in parallel to the other
steps, but the process of adding the DType to NumPy will likely shake out more
issues.

We are hopeful that this work can be completed in time for NumPy 2.0 and we will
certainly complete the ``np.char`` migration before then. However, if need be,
the new DType and the addition to the ``npy`` file format can slip to NumPy 2.1
and is not required for the API changes slated for NumPy 2.0. That said, it
would be nice to have some big new features too!

Alternatives
------------

The main alternative is to maintain the status quo and offer object arrays as
the main solution for arrays of variable-length strings. While this will work,
it means immediate memory usage and performance improvements, as well as future
performance improvements, will not be implemented anytime soon and NumPy will
lose relevance to other ecosystems with better support for arrays of textual
data.

We do not see the proposed DType as mutually exclusive to an improved
fixed-width binary DType that can represent arbitrary binary data or text in any
encoding and adding such a DType in the future will be easier once overall
support for string data in NumPy has improved after adding ``StringDType``.

Discussion
----------

- https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/24483
- https://mail.python.org/archives/list/numpy-discussion@python.org/thread/IHSVBZ7DWGMTOD6IEMURN23XM2BYM3RG/


References and Footnotes
------------------------

.. [1] https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/52711
.. [2] https://mail.python.org/pipermail/numpy-discussion/2017-April/thread.html#76668
.. [3] https://numpy.org/neps/roadmap.html#extensibility
.. [4] https://github.com/h5py/h5py/issues/624#issuecomment-676633529
.. [5] https://github.com/PyTables/PyTables/issues/499
.. [6] https://github.com/elliotgoodrich/SSO-23#sso-23
.. [7] https://discuss.python.org/t/buffer-protocol-and-arbitrary-data-types/26256
.. [8] https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CDataInterface.html
.. [9] https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#variable-size-binary-layout
.. [10] https://github.com/numpy/numpy-user-dtypes/tree/main/stringdtype
.. [11] https://github.com/numpy/numpy-user-dtypes/issues/76#issuecomment-1650367922
.. [12] https://github.com/numpy/numpy-user-dtypes/tree/main/stringdtype/tests
.. [13] https://github.com/ngoldbaum/pandas/tree/stringdtype

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the public domain.
